Our discussion starts with [this tweet] (https://twitter.com/KevinCarson1/status/386511102244171776) by Kevin Carson, in which he points out that as governments weaken in the face of worsening economics, more communities will try to prevent their own hollowing out by refusing to play partner to predatory financial institutions. He uses the example of Richmond, CA, which, if it survives the lawsuits of the banksters, plans to use eminent domain to purchase homes with underwater mortgages, then return them to the owners with more affordable financing terms. It’s an alternative to foreclosures, which serve only to gut communities.

Carson rightly points out that the trend will be more likely be that communities, who will also suffer economic hardship, will simply step back and refuse to devote resources to enforcing the banks’ foreclosures. But while that would help the homeowners and the communities short-term, the properties would still be underwater and their legal status in limbo.

A more permanent and equitable solution would, I think, be for municipalities to purchase the homes under eminent domain, and immediately turn them over at cost to a third-party non-profit housing co-op. The co-op would manage these properties for the good of its members and the community. The original owners would be given first right of occupancy and affordable rental rates, as well as membership and voting rights in the co-op. This would eliminate the devastating impacts that foreclosure and its attendant credit issues have on families, keep the homeowners as stakeholders in their property and their community, and keep property values higher for surrounding property owners. At the same time, more and more properties would be under management by a co-op, which would have the interests of its members and of its community in mind, rather than the interests of developers and financiers.

One can imagine these co-ops to have other beneficial features as well, such as a mandate for environmental responsibility. They could use pooled resources to make sure homes are energy-efficient, to build solar PV installations on the rooftops, or to make sure yard space is used for food, not lawns. Monster homes might be divided up into smaller apartments in accord with the needs of the families who live there. And the municipality could help further by clearing out regulations and zoning by-laws that might prevent these more socially-equitable things from happening.

One can also imagine that these municipally-supported but independent housing co-ops would become a significant political force over time, able to lobby for and attain better tax treatments and zoning changes that would benefit their members and clear away restrictions against things like urban farming, daycares, and home-based businesses. But rather than powerful lobbies run by developers and corporations, these would be owned and managed by the people and families who actually live in the communities. Furthermore, if it was organized properly - with recallable delegates, short board terms, and the ability to vote on every major decision or issue - it could be a political force more democratic than the municipality within which it thrives.

All of this would be - clearly, to me at least - a manifestation of municipal government acting a lot like what Michel Bauwens has termed the Partner State. A partner state is a government that acts as a platform for for-benefit institutions (such as our housing co-op), supporting them with legislation and finances, and helping to coordinate the activities of these for-benefit institutions for the good of the overall citizenry. The for-benefit institutions, in turn, enable their members to create value on top of the mutually-owned commons that they manage.

Now you might rightly ask why an anarchist such as myself or Kevin Carson would be interested in partner states, or in the use of eminent domain to create for-benefit cooperatives. I obviously can’t speak for Carson - he’s more than capable of speaking for himself - but for me it has to do with the most likely path of transition to anarchism. Instead of reform or revolution - the first ineffective, the latter tending to replace a state with a worse state - I propose a third way that I’ll call succession. I mean succession in the ecological sense, where different species of flora and fauna take over an geographical area in response to subtle changes in the environment. Politically, it means the idea of taking more and more economic and political activity outside the purview of the state, until almost everything is done independently of the state, and the state has become vestigial - choked out, if you will, by the weeds of alternate economies and local democratic institutions. The idea is summarized quite well by the old Wobbly phrase, “building the new society in the shell of the old.”

But in order for that to happen, the state has to foster a conducive environment. It can’t crush with its iron fist every attempt to grow out from under its shadow. For example, recent revelations about the massive privacy invasions of the NSA (and similar institutions here in Canada and worldwide) are driving more and more people to use encryption technologies and darknets and other ways of keeping the government’s nose out of their business. But the government could - and quite possibly will - react to that trend by trampling the privacy concerns of its citizens, outlawing encryption techniques, and forcibly confining anyone who uses them. That would have a rather chilling effect on our ability to communicate, organize, and conduct economic transactions out from under government’s glaring eye.

That’s an extreme example, but one that’s top of mind in these days of Snowden’s revelations. There are more common and pervasive ways that government policy can limit the growth of a successor society. The most important of these is any propensity to encourage massive concentrations of wealth in the hands of the oligarchy. Massive pockets of power and wealth - such as those that grow under the rich manure of government-sanctioned monopoly - will make it extremely difficult for any alternative society to take root. That’s because the owners of such wealth will continue to puppet governments to their own ends, making it harder to root them out.

This is why I make no bones about my distaste for the politics of the Tea Party or the Libertarian Party, and encourage all fellow anarchists to thoroughly disown such politics. Their conception of smaller government culminates in a minarchist state whose only function would be to protect the property interests of the wealthy. That is not a path to anarchy. That path leads to nothing more than one of the corporate-controlled dystopian futures envisioned by just about every science fiction film of the last 20 years. The influence of Rand et al on our collective imaginations is no more evident than in our cultural expressions of fear.

The welfare state, soul-sucking and galling as it may be to some anarchists, is at least redistributive; which is to say, it has at least the tendency, if not the sufficiency, to deflate those blisters of inequality that will only make it harder to achieve our desired state of coexistence. As Bakunin said, “We are convinced that liberty without socialism is privilege, injustice; and that socialism without liberty is slavery and brutality.” In the interim, while the current system has us in its grip, and until the succession has taken place, we have a moral duty to take care of the less fortunate. Yes, the state has usurped our ability to do this ourselves, more effectively and with less economic friction, with mutual aid. But in the interim, it’s what there is, and perhaps for now we can do no better than to encourage the growth of something like a partner state as a means of levelling the playing field and optimizing conditions for an anarchic succession.

Paradoxically, the path to no government is not smaller government. We can’t simply hack parts of it away like it was a tumour, since it would quickly metastasize into something much worse. Instead, we should organically replace the parts of society over which the state has any control, until, starved and unloved, the corporatocracy falls away roots and all.

Carson has lots more information about how new technologies and anarchistic organizational principles will foster such a succession in his books, The Homebrew Industrial Revolution and the as-yet-unpublished Desktop Regulatory State, as well as many of his posts on C4SS, most recently, I think, here.
